Root Downfalls of the Vajra Vehicle: A Confession
by Aśvaghoṣa

In the language of India: Vajrayānamūlāpatti
In the language of Tibet: rdo rje theg pa rtsa ba'i ltung ba
Homage to the noble and youthful Mañjuśrī!
künné dangwé lama yi
With perfect inspiration, I bow down
shyab kyi pemar rab tü dé
At the lotus-feet of the guru.
tsawé tungwa chushyi ni
Here I shall set out the fourteen root downfalls
gyü lé sungpa shepar ja
As they are taught in the tantras.
gang chir dorjé dzinpa yi
The Vajradhara said that accomplishments
ngödrub lobpön jé drang sung
Come from following the teacher,
dewé dé la nyepa ni
So to disparage him or her
tsawé tungwa dangpor shé
Is explained as the first root downfall.
dangpo pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the first, I openly admit and confess!
deshek ka lé depa ni
To transgress the words of the sugatas
tungwa nyipa yinpar shé
Is taught to be the second downfall.
nyipa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the second, I openly admit and confess!
dorjé pün la trö né ni
Out of anger, to speak ill
nyepar jöpa sumpa yin
Of one's vajra siblings is the third.
sumpa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the third, I openly admit and confess!
semchen nam la jampa pang
To abandon love for sentient beings
shyipa yinpar gyalwé sung
Is the fourth, the victorious ones say.
shyipa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the fourth, I openly admit and confess!
chö kyi tsawa changchub sem
The root of Dharma is bodhicitta —
dé pongwa ni ngapa yin
To abandon which is the fifth.
ngapa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the fifth, I openly admit and confess!
rang ngam shyen gyi drubpé ta
To disparage the tenets
chö la möpa drukpa yin
Of one's own or others' traditions is the sixth.
drukpa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the sixth, I openly admit and confess!
yongsu ma min semchen la
To disclose secrets to beings
sangwa drokpa dünpa yin
Who are not fully matured is the seventh.
dünpa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the seventh, I openly admit and confess!
pungpo sangye ngé daknyi
To abuse the psycho-physical aggregates,
dé la möpa gyepa yin
Which are by nature the five buddhas, is the eighth.
gyepa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the eighth, I openly admit and confess!
rangshyin dakpé chö nam la
To have doubts about the natural purity
somnyi zawa gupa yin
Of all phenomena is the ninth.
gupa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the ninth, I openly admit and confess!
duk la taktu jam denpa
To show only affection to the wicked
jepa dé ni chupar dö
Is said to be the tenth.
chupa pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the tenth, I openly admit and confess!
ming sok dralwé chö nam la
To conceptualize phenomena,
der tokpa ni chuchikpa
Which are unnameable and so on, is the eleventh.
chuchik pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the eleventh, I openly admit and confess!
semchen dé dang denpa la
To cause those beings who have faith
sem sünjinpa chunyipa
To grow disillusioned is the twelfth.
chunyi pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the twelfth, I openly admit and confess!
damtsik dzé ni jishyin nyi
Not to rely upon the samaya substances
mi tenpa dé chusumpa
As one should is the thirteenth.
chusum pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the thirteenth, I openly admit and confess!
sherab rangshyin bümé la
To disparage women, who are by nature wisdom,
möpar jepa chushyipa
Is the fourteenth.
chushyi pokpa tol lo shak
All breaches of this, the fourteenth, I openly admit and confess!
ngakpé didak pang né ni
The mantra practitioner who avoids all these [downfalls]
ngödrub ngepar tobpar gyur
Will certainly attain accomplishment.
shyendu damtsik lé nyam na
Otherwise, should you fail to keep your commitments
nyampa dü kyi zungwar gyur
You will be caught by the demon of downfall,
dené dukngal nyong gyur shying
And will thus experience suffering.
turdu té té nyalwar dro
Brought down, you will descend to the hells.
dewé ngagyal chom né ni
Subjugate pride, therefore,
daknyi ma trul shepar ja
And know yourself to be unconfused.
nyampar shyakpé lama la
With whatever you can afford,
chi jorpa yi chöjé né
Make offerings to the guru in the Sage's presence.
sum la kyamdro né tsam té
Begin by taking refuge in the Three [Jewels],
changchub sem sok dompa ni
And, as a mantra practitioner,
galté dak la pen dö na
Should you wish to benefit yourself, apply effort
ngakpé bé dé zungwar ja
And uphold the bodhisattva vows and the rest.

This concludes The Root Downfalls of the Vajra Vehicle composed by the great ācārya Aśvaghoṣa.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.